
---
Title: Downtime
Draft: false
Tags:
  - 
---

> Hello all! Downtime rules are here-finally some more uses for gold! After you read this, the only thing needed before the 19th of August is for me to know how you'd like to spend your downtime! As with everything in D&D, you are free to do as much or as little as you'd like beyond that. Enjoy the read!

You have a lot of options for what your character can do-so feel free to experiment. This is an excellent way to get more of your favorite parts of D&D even when you're not at the table-so go for what you enjoy.

> D&D characters are primarily adventurers, so why would the adventure completely stop during downtime?

I don't think the adventures should come to a complete stop when we are away from the table! They'll simply take the form of downtime activities and downtime adventures. All of these downtime activities are taking place at some point **after** the adventure that you are currently on. 

#### **How it works**

1. Your character has a specific amount of time (in weeks) to spend on any activity you choose or any combination of activities.
2. You and/or I will make a series of rolls to determine the results. Lodging/lifestyle costs are calculated. 
3. Your character will earn rewards, penalties, or may even get involved in their own downtime adventure! 

For this first section of downtime, **you'll have 4 weeks** to spend on any of the activities listed further on in this section. I have some ideas listed here that are a bit different from DMG/XGtE/PHB, so please refer to this list first. Additionally, I use the word complication in a couple of places-this does not mean it is the complication list in XGtE. And as always, if there is something you'd like to do that isn't listed, just ask me and we'll see where it goes!

Several activities listed have a gold cost associated with them. Just let me know what you're thinking of spending, **don't let the gold cost stop you** (because this downtime activity is technically taking place AFTER this adventure). I will make sure that the gold cost works and doesn't mess with anything-even if that means it is just a start to something rather than a completed activity. 

#### **Downtime Adventures**

These are text-based adventures that could happen for some or all of you, it simply depends on the dice rolls you take during the downtime activities. Everyone will have the opportunity to try this out and see if they like it or not. **Downtime adventures are completely optional** and there is no penalty for not participating. There are minor rewards for doing it though! 

The way it works is, after you send me your choices for downtime, I may send you a groupme message that has to do with your character and the downtime activities. Could just be the results, could be a downtime adventure! We'll walk through your character's side activity or downtime adventure via text-based turns. They won't be super long content wise, but this could be over the course of many IRL days. All of this really is at your own pace (however long it takes each of us to respond, and remember, it is completely optional and if it ain't fun for you, no worries!) **If you are completely uninterested in downtime text-based adventures, not a problem, just let me know and we'll only work through the downtime activities.** 



# List of Downtime Activities
#### **Seeking Your Fortune (Well, just your day job)**
You know it, it's yellow, it's soft, and it's heavy as hell. Everybody wants that money honey! The most straightforward thing to do with your downtime is to find a way to make some gold. There are a lot of ways to do this, whether it's working a trade, providing magical services to the community, mercenary work, or fighting in the pits. If all else fails, I hear that Chatz is hiring a barmaid! You can spend any number of full weeks working. 
If you spend a week working you'll have a skill check or two associated with the type of work you are doing. After that, you'll roll for an associated range of gold pieces based on your checks (This can range from 1d20-2d100). You will not lose gold pieces for spending a week working. Each character may have unique options.

#### **Religious Services (Saisu and/or Balasar only, with bonuses)** 
Clerics and Paladins are always in high demand at the local temple. The temple always needs help healing the sick, contributing to the crafting of costly healing potions, and conducting services for the public. Many people rely on the temple for help with spiritual concerns, but also for help with worldly favors. Lochfeld is no exception-the temple is always busy. You can spend any number of weeks volunteering at the temple. You are volunteering your time, but the priestess understands that adventurers, especially Paladins, are always in high demand. She will reward you in some manner consistent with the type of aid you render. This could be a promise for future healing or services from a Cleric, a healing potion, local renown, or something else entirely! Saisu and Balasar receive free lodging for any week in which they are volunteering at the temple. 

#### **Crafting a Magical Item (Zalma has bonuses)**
You can spend any number of full weeks attempting to craft a magical item or items. It takes two weeks to attempt to craft an uncommon magical item, and only a week to attempt to craft a common magical item. Spending additional weeks reduces the difficulty (your choice as to which effect). It costs 50gp to attempt a common item and 200gp to attempt an uncommon item. Consumable items cost half as much. Magical items take shape as you craft them. It requires extreme skill and time to craft a specific magical item, but it can be done at additional gold and time costs. Otherwise, at the end of magical crafting, if successful, a list of magical items will be presented for you to choose from. 
Each day of crafting requires a d6 roll (For a week of crafting, 7d6). On a 4 or 5, an additional magical item of the chosen level is added to the choice list. If there are four 1s rolled during the week, some setbacks or minor complications may arise. Five or more 1s rolled during the week will lead to a major complication. On three 6s rolled, an item of the next level of rarity is added to the choice list. If four 6s are rolled, two items can be selected from the choice list without additional cost. Zalma is able to re-roll any two results and take the highest once per week of magical item crafting.

This type of magic item crafting does not include healing potions. That is a separate activity with the herbalism kit.

#### **Scribing a Spell Scroll (Yosim has bonuses)**
Ah, magical pursuits. Sometimes it's just for the convenience of having fireball ready, sometimes it's just so you don't burn a spell slot on Mage Armor. Either way, making spell scrolls can be a damned good idea. Yosim and Zalma are able to do this process on their own, but Yosim has additional bonuses. Saisu and Balasar would have to seek out the services of a mage to help them scribe a spell scroll. You can spend any number of weeks scribing spell scrolls. The process requires magical concentration, special inks, and special paper-plus a comfortable environment for your character to work. First, decide what level of spells you'd like to scribe. For Yosim and Zalma, cantrips cost 10gp to scribe, level 1 spells cost 20gp to scribe, and level 2 spells cost 150gp to scribe. Saisu and Balasar's rates will be higher since they would pay a surcharge to the assisting mage. Yosim will always receive an extra spell scroll (of some sort, could be a duplicate, could be a different spell) whenever he spends at least a week performing this downtime activity. 
#### **Selling a Magical Item/Buying a Magical Item**
Magical items are big business. It's more like trading in fine art than buying or selling simple provisions. For selling a magical item-interested buyers must be found and contacted. They must be allowed a chance to inspect the items. Then, an auction is called. Several things are important-first, enough interested buyers must be located, next, the item must be closely guarded, and last, an auction must be called. Some or all of these tasks can be accomplished simply by offering a commission on the magical item. Less profit, but fewer headaches. Alternatively, you can handle the legwork of looking up interested parties, running security, and hosting an auction. Why go to all of this trouble? Well-magical items attract a lot of gold. Because the market is closed and making magical items is difficult, the prices can vary wildly. Buying a magical item is a similar endeavor. The rarer or more specific the magic item is, the more legwork will be required to find one and agree on a price. Why go to the trouble of buying a magical item? You get exactly what you want, and you may even get it for a discount if they don't know what they are selling!
#### **Research**
Questions, questions, questions! So many questions, so much lore! What is an adventurer to do? Well, hit up the local library, the temple, or find a sage mage! Research is highly dependent on the type of questions you want answers to. Choose any number of weeks you'd like to spend delving into some questions that befuddle you. Be prepared to offer up some gold to helpful people or as "donations" to the library. Some folks may just want some sort of favor to help you out! Research can lead to many wonderful and unpredictable outcomes, but the most straightforward result is that you learn something useful for the future. Isn't it good to know more? You never know when it might come in handy.
#### **Carousing**
Carousing is living it up! Enjoy yourself! But it's also a method for gaining information about the people that inhabit the area. Wouldn't it be nice to have friends that support you? Wouldn't it be nice to have friends? Try out some carousing! Spend any number of weeks hanging out with a given social class. Try to get in good with them. Maybe do them some favors, or buy them a beer, or tell them that they'll certainly find a rich merchant to wed their eldest daughter! This is an excellent way to find out if there are any rumors out there about someone, or a way to garner popular support for a cause. Push comes to shove, it's a good way to get some folks in town to remember you. It costs 10gp per week to mingle with the lower class (farmers, unskilled laborers, and the like), 50gp per week for the middle class (guildsman, skilled workers, low merchants, professional warriors), or 250gp per week for the upper class (leadership, guild representatives, upper clergy, aldermen, lower royalty). The benefits of carousing are a lot like the benefits of research. Your connection to the world may come in handy.
#### **Gambling**
Oh boy oh boy is this a fun time! Did you know that most gamblers stop playing right before they win it big? Come on-give it a spin! Gambling is fast, so you don't have to spend a full week. This can be added on to another activity for some quick thrills, and the chance of hitting the jackpot. First, choose your wager-you can wager anything from 5gp all the way up to 50gp. Next, choose two skills you think your character would use to help them with their gambling. Why did you pick those skills? You'll make a couple of d20 rolls with your associated modifiers, and I'll do the same for the opposing gambler. Whomever has the highest added result, wins! You'll either double your wager or lose it completely. 

If you do choose to spend a full week gambling, early successes will quickly lead you towards the high roller table-Higher stakes, higher rewards. You should be prepared to wager 200 gold pieces (whether you have that gold right now or not). Your character will play a few games of chance. You could win 4d100+100gp. You could lose your starting wager-or, you could end up in debt to some shady characters. Only the dice know the outcome!

#### **Crime** (Yosim or Zalma only)
They say crime doesn't pay-but these "they" people are usually pretty dumb. After all, is it really a crime if you *really* needed those gold pieces more than they did? You can choose to spend any number of full weeks committing various crimes. Generally these are for the purposes of getting some much needed money, but these crimes could serve any purpose that your character likes. Tread lightly however-crimes can lead to a bad reputation, a bounty, or even imprisonment. You must spend 20gp readying yourself for the chosen crime (gathering information, paying people off, bribes, supplies). The 20gp will be spent regardless of the outcome of the crime. These crimes can range from simple acts such as mugging or skullduggery to as complex as stealing trade secrets from a merchant-or even stealing from wealthy public figures! Choose a couple of skills that you think will help you commit your crime. Decide on the scope of the crime or what type of loot or mark you are looking for. Rewards are known before the crime is attempted and can range from a 30gp "finder's fee" to 300gp. Think you are in over your head? Perhaps you can convince a couple of ne'er-do-wells to help you out for a cut of the profits! 

#### **Intense Training**
It's the only way to make real improvements! And man, it ain't easy. But, with a concentrated effort, you can learn a language or gain proficiency in a new skill. Hell, you could even increase an ability score! Many of these things require months of training, or specialized instructors. This is not a downtime activity that you throw weeks at-this one requires units of months (4 weeks). This type of training regimen is also the way that wizards craft brand new spells and how artificers craft new constructs. Paladins may use this time to deepen their connection with their god, or with their weapons and armor. 
#### **Sowing Rumors/Gaining Renown**
Some people really do enjoy couch cushions. Some people enjoy coconut trees. Both kinds of people love spreading rumors for personal gain. Sometimes you just gotta fight dirty. Is there someone you really dislike? You can spend any number of weeks spreading rumors through various means. Figure out how you'd like to destroy this person or organization. Hit them where it hurts. The more outlandish the rumor, the more gold it will take to find wily ways to convince folks. But remember-people do love to gossip. Get enough people on board and this rumor might become universal. Gaining renown works in a similar way, but with the whole honesty thing tied to it. While you *could* bribe and fake your way into renown, most folks remember actual deeds. Take some time and spend some gold to help people, or pay the bard to sing tales of you. Your personal renown is your reputation-and without a reputation, well, what kind of adventurer are you? The benefits of both of these activities are simple. Rumors weaken any enemy of yours that is civilized enough to care about rumors. Renown strengthens your own name and could lead to attracting followers, fame, recognition, or a simple discount at the local smithy. 
#### **Begin Work on a Stronghold (Coming Soon)**
This one we aren't quite ready for yet in this campaign, but if it sounds intriguing to you, read on! This is based off of the strongholds and followers system, but there is a bit of homebrewing going on. If you ain't interested and just want to know about the downtime activities available right now, then just look at the content above this one. **This is basically a sneak peek!**

The transition to strongholds generally happens around level 5. This is when the team of adventurers could turn into a serious force in the regional power structure, which the party is rapidly approaching. 

Strongholds are actual construction projects that grant serious bonuses. They can be built from scratch (with enough gold, time, and permission from local royalty), granted as gifts, or renovated and rebuilt from abandoned structures. There is a gold cost and construction time for each of these, but once a stronghold is built, immediate bonuses are granted. And, of course, strongholds can be upgraded.

Classes have unique stronghold types that they can build. Each player character can build one stronghold of any type they have access to. They can attached together as one castle, or they can be spread across the map. All types of strongholds provide bonuses during warfare in addition to their bonuses while at peace.

Saisu and Balasar can build either a Keep or a Temple. 

Yosim can build a Mage's Tower.

Zalma can build a Foundry, or, after taking a level in Rogue, a Hideout. 


A **keep** is military fortification. The keep defends an area of land, and the owner of a keep generally must hold title of some sort (lord, earl, viscount, baron, valet, etc.). The keep trains and maintains professional military units and can levy troops by drumming up the militia. Farmers love safe places to settle, so chances are they'd be happy to pay a tax to you in exchange for the safety. During war, keeps provide combat fortification and unit training, recruitment, and arming. 

A **temple** honors your god and provides needed services to the region. This stronghold attracts monks, clerics, and maybe even pilgrims. The foundation of a temple of worship is looked upon kindly by your god. In addition to the benefits that may bring, the temple also provides healing services. Competing religions in the region may not like your temple, so be prepared. A formal position in the clergy is generally a requirement, or a benefit, of building this type of stronghold. During war, temples provide units that can heal and units with special bonuses against undead.

A **mage's tower** provides much needed protection and discretion for delving into magical research. These towers attract magical initiates who wish to study or contribute.  Advantages are given to magical research and crafting conducted here. The secrets of the universe can be revealed through careful study. Each mage's tower must be approved by the mages of [[Mirkscale]]. A formal rank within the hierarchy of Mirkscale is generally a requirement or benefit of construction. During war, a mage's tower provides units that can cast powerful battle magic. 

A **foundry** is an Artificer's playground. The foundry is a magical factory. It requires raw material to operate, but both magical and mundane creations can be generated. The foundry primarily attracts blacksmiths and even other artificers. These skilled individuals can hail from many places and can have many backgrounds. A healthy supply of laborers is usually required. A formal rank within the [[Svirfneblin Council]] or [[Dwarven Guilds]] is generally a requirement or benefit of construction. During war, a foundry can produce mundane weapons or war materials, or units such as magical constructs or siege engines.

A **hideout** is the headquarters of a spy network. Generally located within a city or major settlement, these strongholds generally masquerade as a business. The hideout attracts thieves, assassins, and spies. The hideout can use thieves and assassins to generate income through various crimes. Assassins and spies can be used to harm or observe enemies. A formal recognition through a bandit organization is generally a requirement or benefit of construction. During war, the hideout provides stealthy units and scouts, and the hideout can continue to use its network of spies and assassins. 